When you selectively attend to a visual stimulus, you enhance its representation in your mind's eye. Compared to non-attended stimuli, attended stimuli appear higher in contrast [@Carrasco2000VisRes], are detected faster and more accurately [@Posner1984], and trigger a stronger pupillary light response [@Binda2015Increases;@Mathôt2013Plos]. Attention is also the gate to visual working memory [@Bundesen1990]: You need to attend to a stimulus to remember it.

Many theories of vision state that the link between attention and working memory goes both ways: Not only is working memory biased toward attended stimuli [@Van+der+stigchel2007], attention is also captured by stimuli that match the contents of working memory [e.g., @DuncanHumphreys1989;@Folk1992;@Wolfe1994]. For example, if you keep a red apple in working memory, other red objects, such as firetrucks (in countries where these are red), automatically attract attention. The influential biased-competition model explains this in terms of neural activity [@DesimoneDuncan1995;@Chelazzi1993]. According to biased competition, similar patterns of neural activity are set up when you keep a stimulus in memory, and when you actually see that same stimulus [see also @Postle2006]. Therefore, when you keep a red stimulus in memory, and subsequently see a red and a green stimulus, the red stimulus elicits stronger neural activity (perceptual activity on top of working-memory activity) than the green stimulus (perceptual activity only). In other words, working memory is a 'search template' that guides attention by increasing baseline activity for memorized stimuli in visual cortices.

Behavioral studies have provided compelling evidence that working memory can guide attention in the way predicted by biased competition and related theories [e.g., @Awh1998Rehearsal;@Downing2000;@Olivers2006;@PanSoto2010]. For example, in a study by Olivers and colleagues [-@Olivers2006], participants kept a color (e.g. red) in working memory. Next, they searched for a target among multiple distractors, one of which had a unique color that either matched (a red circle), or did not match (a green circle), the memorized color. The crucial finding was that response times on the visual-search task increased when the distractor color matched the memorized color. This suggests that the memory-match distractor captured attention more strongly than other distractors; that is, attention was biased toward stimuli that matched the contents of working memory.

However, other studies, using similar dual-task designs, found that memorized stimuli do not, or not always, guide attention [e.g., @DowningDodds2004;@Van+moorselaar2014Comp;@WoodmanLuck2007]. For example, Woodman and Luck [-@WoodmanLuck2007] found that the presence of a memory-match distractor did not always affect response times on a visual-search task; and when it did, the effect was sometimes in the opposite direction from that reported by Olivers and colleagues [-@Olivers2006], suggesting that attention could be biased away from, rather than toward, stimuli that matched the contents of working memory.

Most evidence for the relationship (or lack thereof) between attention and working memory comes from behavioral studies that have used dual-task designs like those described above (but not all; we will return to other approaches in the discussion). Such experiments are limited in two main ways. First, participants, who are typically less-than-naive university students, undoubtedly guess that there is a link between the visual-search and memory tasks, which may affect their behavior in an unpredictable way--a point also raised by Woodman and Luck [-@WoodmanLuck2007]. Second, using behavioral responses, it is difficult to test how attention evolves during a trial: Is there a sustained bias of attention toward memory-match items, or do they grab attention only briefly? If attention is grabbed only briefly by memory-match items, this might explain why they have little or no effect in a slow-paced visual-search task, such as used by Woodman and Luck [-@WoodmanLuck2007], whereas they do have an effect in a fast-paced attentional-capture task, such as used by Olivers and colleagues [-@Olivers2006].

To bypass these limitations, we used a new pupillometric technique to continuously track the focus of attention in a working-memory task, without requiring an intervening visual-search task. This technique exploits the fact that the pupillary light response is driven mostly by attended stimuli; that is, if eye movements and visual input are controlled, your pupil is smaller when you attend to a bright, compared to a dark, stimulus [e.g., @Binda2013JNeuro;@Mathôt2013Plos;@Naber2013Osc]+[; reviewed in @Mathôt2015CurrDir]. We conducted two experiments with the same overall design. Participants maintained a single color in working memory. During a five-second retention interval, two task-irrelevant probes were presented. One probe was presented on a dark background; the other was presented on a bright background. Because the pupillary light response is modulated by covert attention, this allowed us to track whether and when attention was biased toward (or away from) the memory-match probe. Based on previous studies [e.g., @Olivers2006], we predicted that there would be a sustained bias of attention toward the memory-match probe; therefore, we predicted that, throughout the retention interval, the pupil would be larger when the memory-match probe was presented on a dark, compared to a bright, background.
